Refactor chapter "Using Zeitgeist Markets" (#50)
zeitgeistpm/documentation: docs/learn/using-zeitgeist-markets.md

title: Using Zeitgeist Markets
---

## Assets on Zeitgeist

### The ZTG Token and Other Currencies

The primary asset on Zeitgeist is the _ZTG_ token. On the Battery Station test
network, this token is known as _ZBS_, but in SDK and CLI commands, and on this
page, both ZTG and ZBS are called ZTG.

ZTG may be used for placing bets in prediction markets (like USD in the examples
of the previous chapters). Outcome asset tokens will not redeem to 1\$ when a
market is resolved, but to 1 ZTG instead, and trading fees will be paid in ZTG.
In the future, you will be able to teleport select foreign assets like
[aUSD](https://acala.network/ausd) to Zeitgeist using XCM to use them for

> trading.

Author: 4bec9883575aa9913435dc163344ca8565e00c29

> Other uses of ZTG include governance, staking for dispute resolution and

Author: 4bec9883575aa9913435dc163344ca8565e00c29

<!-- prettier-ignore -->
:::important
As liquidity provider for a prediction market, you are essentially betting

> against the informants' ability to predict future outcomes.

Author: "This sounds like a disadvantage for LPs." It is a serious disadvantage. But I'll take a look at this when doing neo-swaps.

  :::important
  The market creator can specify _any_ address as oracle, but also provides
  the stake for the oracle. If the market creator specifies an unwitting
  oracle (by mistake or with malicious intent), the market creator will most
  likely lose their stake and the oracle will go unpunished.
  :::

- The _market dispute mechanism_ is used to resolve disputes between users. See
  [disputes] for details.

- The _scoring rule_ determines the automatic market maker that the market's
  pools use. There's currently only one scoring rule available on Zeitgeist.

- The _period_ determines when a market opens and closes and is specified either
  in blocks or using [UNIX timestamps](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unix_time)
  (in _milliseconds_ since epoch). The Zeitgeist application allows users to
  comfortably set the period using human-readable dates.

The curret status of a market is described by the `status` field. The market's
initial status depends on the creation type and scoring rule:

- Advised markets are _proposed_ and are awaiting approval by the [Advisory
  Committee].
- Permissionless markets and approved advised markets are _active_ or _closed_

>   depending on what their period is.

Author: 6b6fbdfca6b02236662ddacdea926ee2007004ba

>   depending on what their period is.

Author: 6b6fbdfca6b02236662ddacdea926ee2007004ba

>   depending on what their period is.

Author: 6b6fbdfca6b02236662ddacdea926ee2007004ba

### Creation Type: Permissionless & Advised Markets

Th Zeitgeist network allow entirely _permissionless_ creation of market. Anyone
can create a new market, provided they place a _validity bond_ in ZTG. The
purpose of the bond is to ensure that the market obeys the rules put in place by
the Zeitgeist team. It is returned to the market creator after the market is
resolved. A permissionless market that violates the [market creation rules] may

> be _deleted without warning_, destroying all associated funds.

Author: d06ff1e0f070d3afd3786d5587c1b081ec1db225

If the user does not wish to place the validity bond, they may instead create
the market as _advised_ and only place a smaller _advisory bond_. The [Advisory
Committee] then decides if the market is valid. Until this decision is made, no

> liquidity pool may be deployed for the market and no full sets may be bought or

Author: What else would a liquidity pool be for?

sold.

If the market is deemed valid according to the [market creation rules], the
advisory bond is returned to the creator and liquidity pools may be deployed.
If, on the other hand, the market violated the rules or is invalid, the advisory
bond is slashed or the user is asked to change the market before it is approved.
Should, for any reason, the committee not reach a decision until the market
ends, the advisory bond and oracle bond are both returned to the creator.

### Market Lifecycle

> The market opens when the starting block/timestamp is reached. If a liquidity

Author: No, this PR is not for neo-swaps stuff.

pool is deployed for the market during market hours or before, users can swap

> assets and may provide liquidity to the pool.

Reviewer: Should we adapt this sentence to your current zrml-neo-swaps implementation in which the user other than MC can't participate in liquidity provision?

Author: No, this PR is not for neo-swaps stuff.

The market closes when the ending block/timestamp is reached. This means that
swapping assets and providing liquidity is no longer allowed, but users are

> allowed to remove their liquidity now that it is no longer user.

Reviewer: In CPMM LPs the reasoning was that pool funds can be withdrawn at any point, right? I think this is still the case for neo-swaps, right? Or not for the first version, but whenever we allow multiple LPs.

Author: Actually, in CPMM they can't withdraw all their funds while the market is still open. With LMSR, that's allowed.

The oracle of the market is expected to submit which outcome actually occurred
within a fixed frame of time, the _reporting period_. If the oracle fails to

> submit the report in time, the market creators stake will be slashed, and all
> addresses will be able to submit their report.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
submit the report in time, the market creators stake will be slashed, and any
address will be able to submit a report as an outsider.
```

Once the report is submitted, the status of the market changes from _closed_ to
_reported_.

### Disputes

> <!-- TODO --->

Reviewer: TODO here

Author: f5a5d5b46f9f24fe06ebbb46b75d1dd2be428fc8

stakes tokens back, while the stake of those who staked for other tokens are
slashed.

## Trading on Zeitgeist

### The Prize Pool

On every market, outcome tokens may be minted in _full sets_ by users while the
market is open (exactly one of each outcome token from the market) at the exact

> price of 1 ZTG (plus transaction fee). The ZTG paid for the mint is placed in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
price of 1 unit of the market base asset (for example ZTG) plus transaction fee. The base asset (e. g. ZTG) amount paid for the mint is placed in
```

Author: de8d70352ecdda34706a2acab866624cb6bb02b5

the market's _prize pool_. _All outcome tokens are created by minting them in
this fashion._ Full sets may also be destroyed. For every full set destroyed the

> user receives 1 ZTG back from the prize pool.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
user receives 1 unit of market base asset (e. g. ZTG) back from the prize pool.
```

When a market is created, the prize pool is empty, and the balance of the prize
pool cannot be changed except by minting and burning full sets. These rules

> guarantee the prize pool contains exactly 1 ZTG for every full set of outcome

Reviewer: ```suggestion
guarantee the prize pool contains exactly 1 unit of market base asset (e. g. ZTG) for every full set of outcome
```

Author: 1c6b1b41ed3285f6b5f5d418dee5c4dbf6708cc6

> tokens in circulation. This was, the winning outcome token is backed 1:1 in ZTG.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tokens in circulation. This was, the winning outcome token is backed 1:1 in the markets base asset (also called collateral; e. g. ZTG).
```

Author: 1c6b1b41ed3285f6b5f5d418dee5c4dbf6708cc6

The prize pool should not be confused with the market's liquidity pool, which is
described further below.

For example, Alice has 3.7 ZTG in her wallet. She mints 3.5 full sets for the
James Webb Space Telescope market, pays 3.5 ZTG (which goes into the prize pool
of the JWST market) plus transaction fees, and receives 3.5 JWSTYES and 3.5
JWSTNO.

Bob, on the other hand, has 2.1 JWSTYES and 3.4 JWSTNO tokens. He decides to
destroy 2.1 full sets (leaving him with only 1.3 JWSTNO) and receive 2.1 ZTG
back from the prize pool. Note that Bob could not have destroyed any more full

> sets, as he owns no more JWSTYES.

Reviewer: Examples are okay using ZTG. ;-)

### The Liquidity Pool

Zeitgeist supports a constant mean market maker, also referred to as constant
product market maker or CPMM on our platform, which is based on the
[Balancer AMM](https://balancer.fi/whitepaper.pdf), a variation on the basic
$x \cdot y = \mathrm{const}$ formula which allows different assets to have

> different _weights_, which define their impact on price.

Reviewer: Deprecated in favour of neoswaps?

Author: No, this PR is not for neo-swaps stuff.

> This AMM's liquidity pool contains balances of ZTG and of all outcome tokens of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This AMM's liquidity pool contains balances of the base asset (e. g. ZTG) and of all outcome tokens of
```

> the market. Users can trade their tokens with tokens stored in the pool: They
> can buy outcome tokens from the pool with ZTG which is then added to the pool,
> or sell outcome tokens to the pool for some of the pool's ZTG.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the market. Users can trade their tokens with tokens stored in the pool. For example they
could buy outcome tokens from the pool with ZTG which is then added to the pool,
or sell outcome tokens to the pool for some of the pool's ZTG.
```

Okay, I admit this is a little repetitive. SOrry about this!

Author: 3126cc86a2f51d1b7a034c78ce7d4544c12e2cdc

By default, a new market has no liquidity pool. Instead, the pool must either be
deployed by the market creator, or by some external liquidity provider. After
the pool is created, others may _join_ the liquidity pool by providing
additional liquidity. When deploying liquidity into a pool, a liquidity provider
will usually provide the same amount of full sets of outcome tokens as ZTG ($x$
of each outcome token and $x$ ZTG). The current minimum for $x$ is 100, making a

> total value of 200 ZTG.

Reviewer: Will neo-swaps allow an automatic opening of the liquidity pool in the future like we had with CPMM? Because currently the market creator has to open the market with their liquidity at the creation time, right?

Author: Not sure if that's something that we actually want (as discussed privately). Seems like a lot of work for something that isn't really our responsibility.

For example, lets say the JWST market has no liquidity pool yet and Alice wishes
to deploy a pool. First she mints 100 full sets of outcome tokens, so she pays
100 ZTG into the prize pool of the market and receives 100 JWSTYES and 100
JWSTNO. Then she transfers these outcome tokens plus 100 ZTG into the pool. The
whole endeavor costs her 200 ZTG plus transaction costs and earns her 100
liquidity shares.

Suppose now that the market ends and the balances of the pool are the following:
63 JWSTYES, 89 JWSTNO, and 120 ZTG. The balance of ZTG has increased from
trading fees. After market close, Alice withdraws her funds: The outcome tokens
and 120 ZTG. If the JWST did not launch on December 18, then she can redeem the
89 JWSTNO for 89 ZTG from the prize pool. This means that she's made a gain of 9
ZTG for supplying liquidity to the pool. If, on the other hand, the JWST does
launch December 18, Alice is left holding 120 ZTG and 63 JWSTYES (redeemable for

> 63 ZTG), and, thus, Alice got rekt to the tune of 17 ZTG (but many traders will
> have made some profit).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
63 ZTG). As a result, Alice will incur a net loss of 17 ZTG, while many traders might realize a profit.
```

Reviewer: We should avoid colloquial language on our formal and professional documentation site.
